feat(rocke): Update rocke dispatcher with new filtering mechanism and bind/build contracts (#10235)
ROCm/rocm-libraries: dnn-providers/hip-kernel-provider/rocke/platform/python/rocke/dispatch/ARCHITECTURE.md

Status: design proposal. Describes the target model for registering kernel
families per architecture and routing a problem to one kernel — or to a ranked
list of kernels — through a declared, testable filtering pipeline.

Companion documents: `README.md` (current dispatcher usage),
`library/dispatch/AGENTS.md` (attention-family specifics).

---

## 1. Goals

1. A kernel is registered once, declaring the architectures, dtypes, shape
  ranges, and specializations it was built for.
2. A problem is routed to a kernel by filtering functions the kernel itself
  owns. Adding a kernel never edits another kernel.
3. Dispatch returns either the single best kernel or every eligible kernel, from
  the same registry and the same filters. Autotuning is the list form of the
   same query, not a parallel mechanism. A benchmark harness can build, launch,
   and verify every kernel the registry offers without per-family code.
4. A selected kernel has a stable identifier, and that identifier resolves back
  to the kernel. Selection is reproducible offline for a target architecture
   that is not the host.
5. The spec a dispatcher produces is the spec a builder consumes. There is one

>   selection stack per operator, not two.

Reviewer: [suggested additions, goals already met with the design]
```
6. Registry coverage is queryable without a request: `for_arch` and
   `coverage()` answer "what runs on X?" from declared data, never by probing.
7. Selection is explainable: every candidate's accept/reject reason is
   recoverable from the result, so routing decisions are auditable.
8. Selection and build changes preserve the Python/C++ byte-identity contract;
   dispatch is a new caller of the shared builders, never a third lowering path.

```

Author: Added verbatim as goals 6–8 in ef06b71. Thanks — 6 and 7 in particular were properties the design already had with nothing in §1 claiming them, which is the sort of gap that lets a later change quietly drop one.

kernels must be wired into registry/test/byte-identity coverage before they are
considered complete; workload-only benchmark scripts should not be wired into
production dispatch by default." A passing experiment does not register a
kernel, and a workload-specific script is not meant to become a dispatch target.

It is also where the pipeline currently leaks. Stage 1 and stage 2 are complete
for `library/kernels/gfx1250/wmma_attention_fwd.py` — a finished spec-driven
builder, a `wmma_attention_fwd_verify.py` harness, and a written-up case study —
and yet no client can reach it. `ATTENTION_REGISTRY` holds six candidates — the
generic `unified_2d` and `unified_3d` paths, plus four arch-specialized ones for
gfx942 and gfx950 — and not one of them is gfx1250, so the kernel is reachable
only by running its verify script by hand. Section 3 catalogs why this keeps
happening, and section 9.1 shows the registration that fixes it.

### 2.4 Consume

One registry, three consumers, no parallel selection stacks (goal 3):

- **Client API / production** — `dispatch_*(req)` returns a single kernel, which
is what the provider ABI under `dnn-providers/hip-kernel-provider/include`

> calls through.

Reviewer: C++ client API (rocke/library/api/, rocke_client) was removed by [#9800](https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/pull/9800). No provider ABI calls dispatch today;and its intended replacement — the hipDNN Universal Kernel Descriptor connector, [RFC 0017 / #9533](https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/pull/9533). Reword to name the UKD connector as the planned consumer

Author: Reworded in ef06b71. I checked both halves of this before rewriting, and they hold: `rocke/library/api/` no longer exists, and `dnn-providers/hip-kernel-provider/include` contains only `hip_kernel_provider_common`, with no reference to dispatch anywhere under it. So the old sentence was asserting a caller that is not there.

The bullet now states that no shipped ABI calls through this lane today, cites #9800 for the removal, and names the hipDNN Universal Kernel Descriptor connector (RFC 0017 / #9533) as the planned consumer. I also used it to carry the "so what" — the UKD connector being the intended consumer is precisely why single-kernel selection has to stay reproducible from a request alone, which ties the lane back to goal 4.

- **Benchmark and autotune** — `dispatch_*_all(req)` returns every eligible
kernel, `sweep_space(req)` expands each into its knob variants, and `bind()`
makes them launchable by one generic harness (section 7.5).
- **CI** — by-identifier replay and coverage queries (sections 7.3 and 7.4)
assert that what was registered is still selectable and still byte-identical.

The loop closes at the second lane: a sweep produces measurements that land back
in stage 2 as a case study, which in turn revises a heuristic or a priority band
in stage 3.

> ## 3. Why this needs to change

Reviewer: §2 (proposed workflow) precedes §3 (why today is broken), so the proposal is read before its motivation. Consider swapping — problem before solution — and making §2 consistently target-state, since it currently mixes "stages 1–2 already exist" with a proposed stage 3.

Author: Swapped in ef06b71: "Why this needs to change" is now §2 and the workflow is §3. This turned out cheap — nothing in the document referenced "section 2", so it was nine "section 3" cross-references to renumber and no prose that depended on the old order.

On the second half of the comment, the mixing was real and I fixed it in two places rather than one:

- The workflow intro now says outright that the section describes the target model, and drops the "the first two stages already exist and are healthy" hedge, which was the sentence doing the mixing.
- The "it is also where the pipeline currently leaks" paragraph in §3.3 became a back-reference to §2 instead of a restatement of it. That paragraph was largely duplicating §2's gfx1250 finding anyway, and with the problem section now first it can just name the leak against the model and point at §9.1 for the fix.

One unrelated correction while I was in that section: it opened with "Four gaps block the goals above" over five bolded gaps. Now says five.

`candidates`, `supported`, `select`, `extend`. There is no `get(name)` and no
way to resolve a `KernelId`. Names are already unique (`register` enforces it),
so the index exists but is not exposed.

`cache_key` **conflates the problem with the kernel.** It concatenates
`request_hash` and `spec_hash`, so two problems that produce a byte-identical
spec get different keys and therefore different compile-cache entries. This is
why attention grew its own separate cache keyed on a problem tuple.

## 4. Vocabulary

| Term           | Meaning                                                                                                                                               |
| -------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Family**     | One operator surface with a shared request type and registry: `attention_unified`, `gemm_fp16_rcr`, `conv_implicit_gemm`.                             |
| **Candidate**  | One registered kernel implementation. The unit of registration and selection.                                                                         |

> | **Request**    | The normalized problem, architecture included. Frozen, hashable, JSON-serializable. Exposes `normalized()` for hashing and `dims()` for shape gating. |

Reviewer: Minor: cites normalized() "for hashing" but the doc never explains what it normalizes or why. Unlike dims(), which gets a full §5.1 contract, normalized() is only referenced. Add a line: it canonicalizes case-variant fields (e.g. dtype) and serializes the frozen request so request_hash is stable across equivalent requests.

Author: Added in ef06b71, as a labelled paragraph in §5.1 sitting next to the `dims()` contract, so the two halves of the request surface are explained in the same place.

I checked the implementations before writing it, and it does a little more than canonicalize dtype: `normalize_dtype` on `dtype`, upper-case on `layout`, and strip plus lower-case on `algorithm` and `spec_id`. Two consumers seemed worth naming rather than just saying "for hashing":

- `request_hash` is `stable_json_hash(req.normalized())` with keys sorted, so two spellings of the same problem hash alike and index one tuning record instead of two.
- `Capability.check` reads it for arch, dtype, and layout, so a request written `dtype="FP16"` gates identically to `"fp16"` rather than falling out of the prefilter on spelling.

The paragraph closes on the split that makes the pair easy to remember: `normalized()` canonicalizes *identity*, `dims()` exposes what may be *gated on*.

> | **Dimension**  | One named integer quantity a family exposes through `dims()`, stored or derived. Families range from two (`norm`) to fourteen (`conv`).               |

Reviewer: `Dimension` collides with tensor dims — worth one clarifying clause in the Vocabulary entry. A rename (gate_params/quantities) would read better but touches ~40 identifiers across all families and tests; not worth the churn in this PR.

```suggestion
| **Dimension**  | Dimension — a gateable problem scalar (not a tensor axis): any named integer a family exposes through dims(), stored or derived (e.g. total_q, gqa_ratio). Families range from two (norm) to fourteen (conv).               |
```

Author: Applied your wording in ef06b71, with the backticks kept on `dims()`, `total_q`, and `gqa_ratio` to match the rest of the table. Agreed on deferring the rename — `gate_params` would read better, but not at the cost of ~40 identifiers across every family and its tests in this PR.
